Updates to the Java and VS Code docs (#14207)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/data-extensions-to-model-java-dependencies.rst

> .. _data-extensions-to-model-dependencies:

Reviewer: General comment: this article is covers several concepts:

* firstly, data extensions
* secondly, the format used to model sources, sinks and summaries in Java code

I _think_ the original title 'Customizing Library Models for Java" was slightly more appropriate to cover both of those concepts.

Customizing library models for Java and Kotlin
==============================================

> You can use data extensions to model the methods and callables that control data flow in any framework or library. This is especially useful for custom frameworks or niche libraries, that are not supported by the standard CodeQL libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can model the methods and callables that control data flow in any framework or library. This is especially useful for custom frameworks or niche libraries, that are not supported by the standard CodeQL libraries.
```

.. include:: ../reusables/kotlin-beta-note.rst

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-model-packs-java.rst

About this article
------------------

> This article contains reference material about how data extensions interact with standard queries and the syntax used to define extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article contains reference material about how to define custom models for sources, sinks and flow summaries for Java dependencies in data extension files.
```

> If you want to create your own data extensions, you should use the CodeQL model editor in the CodeQL extension for Visual Studio Code. The model editor automatically guides you through the process of defining models, displaying the properties you need to define and the options available. You can save the resulting models as data extensions and use them without worrying about the syntax.

Reviewer 2: Data extensions are more general than the specific extensible predicates used for MaD modelling. We could imagine other uses cases than MaD for data extensions - we expect to use extensible predicates for threat modelling as well.

Author: Thanks for flagging this. I'll leave @jf205 to decide whether we should generalize this now, or in the future when document threat modeling ✨

For more information, see ":ref:`Using the CodeQL model editor <using-the-codeql-model-editor>`."

About data extensions
---------------------

> You can customize analysis by defining models (summaries, sinks, and sources) of your code's dependencies in data extension files. Each model defines the behavior of one or more elements of your library or framework, such as methods and callables. When you run dataflow analysis, these models expand the potential sources and sinks tracked by data flow analysis and improve the precision of results.

Author: There were two comments on this line. Adding the second suggestion:

```suggestion
You can customize analysis by defining models (summaries, sinks, and sources) of your code's dependencies in data extension files. Each model defines the behavior of one or more elements of your library or framework, such as methods and callables. When you run dataflow analysis, these models expand the potential sources and sinks tracked by dataflow analysis and improve the precision of results.
```

> You can customize analysis by defining models (summaries, sinks, and sources) of your code's dependencies in data extension files. Each model defines the behavior of one or more elements of your library or framework, such as a methods and callables. When you run data flow analysis, these models expand the potential sources and sinks tracked by data flow analysis and improve the precision of results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can customize analysis by defining models (summaries, sinks, and sources) of your code's dependencies in data extension files. Each model defines the behavior of one or more elements of your library or framework, such as a methods and callables. When you run dataflow analysis, these models expand the potential sources and sinks tracked by data flow analysis and improve the precision of results.
```

?

> Most of the security queries search for paths from a source of untrusted input to a sink that represents a vulnerability, this is known as taint tracking. Each source is a starting point for data flow analysis to track tainted data and each sink is an end point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of the security queries search for paths from a source of untrusted input to a sink that represents a vulnerability. This is known as taint tracking. Each source is a starting point for data flow analysis to track tainted data and each sink is an end point.
```

> Most of the security queries search for paths from a source of untrusted input to a sink that represents a vulnerability, this is known as taint tracking. Each source is a starting point for data flow analysis to track tainted data and each sink is an end point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of the security queries search for paths from a source of untrusted input to a sink that represents a vulnerability, this is known as taint tracking. Each source is a starting point for dataflow analysis to track tainted data and each sink is an end point.
```

?

Data extensions use union semantics, which means that the tuples of all extensions for a single extensible predicate are combined, duplicates are removed, and all of the remaining tuples are queryable by referencing the extensible predicate.

Publish data extension files in a CodeQL model pack to share
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can group one or more data extention files into a CodeQL model pack and publish it to the GitHub Container Registry. This makes it easy for anyone to download the model pack and use it to extend their analysis. For more information, see "`Creating a CodeQL model pack <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/codeql-cli/using-the-advanced-functionality-of-the-codeql-cli/creating-and-working-with-codeql-packs#creating-a-codeql-model-pack/>`__ and `Publishing and using CodeQL packs <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/codeql-cli/using-the-advanced-functionality-of-the-codeql-cli/publishing-and-using-codeql-packs/>`__ in the CodeQL CLI documentation.

> Extensible predicates in the CodeQL library for Java/Kotlin

Reviewer: I think we need to keep this section here for clarity. I suggest tweaking the title though.

```suggestion
Extensible predicates used to create custom models in Java and Kotlin
```

> Extensible predicates in the CodeQL library for Java/Kotlin

Reviewer 2: These are the extensible predicates used for modelling (we could imagine introducing more extensible predicates unrelated to MaD (Models as Data) later).

Reviewer: I think we need to keep this section here for clarity. I suggest tweaking the title though.

```suggestion
Extensible predicates used to create custom models in Java and Kotlin
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The CodeQL library for Java and Kotlin analysis exposes the following extensible predicates:

- ``sourceModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, output, kind, provenance)``. This is used to model sources of potentially tainted data.
- ``sinkModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, kind, provenance)``. This is used to model sinks where tainted data maybe used in a way that makes the code vulnerable.

> - ``summaryModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)``. This is used to summarize how data values from a source flow outside the repository in a dependency of the main codebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``summaryModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)``. This is used to is used to model flow through elements.
```

> - ``summaryModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)``. This is used to summarize how data values from a source flow outside the repository in a dependency of the main code base.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``summaryModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)``. This is used to summarize how data values from a source flow outside the repository in a dependency of the main codebase.
```

- ``neutralModel(package, type, name, signature, kind, provenance)``. This is similar to a summary model but used to model the flow of values that have only a minor impact on the dataflow analysis.

> The extensible predicates are populated using data extensions specified in YAML files. For more information about extensible predicates, see ":doc:`extensible-predicates`."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extensible predicates are populated using the models defined in data extensions files. For more information about extensible predicates, see ":doc:`extensible-predicates`."
```

> Examples of data extension definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of custom model definitions
```

--------------------------------------

The examples in this section are taken from the standard CodeQL Java query pack published by GitHub. They demonstrate how to add tuples to extend extensible predicates that are used by the standard queries.

> For details of the *mini DSLs* that define models for each extensible predicate, see ":doc:`extensible-predicates`."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For details of the mini DSLs that define models for each extensible predicate, see ":doc:`extensible-predicates`."
```

?

> For details of the mini domain-specific langauge that defines models for each extensible predicate, see ":doc:`extensible-predicates`."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For details of the mini domain-specific language that defines models for each extensible predicate, see ":doc:`extensible-predicates`."
```
